Learning to Play Othello Without Human Knowledge
Shantanu ThakoorSurag NairMegha Jhunjhunwala
Stanford University
thakoor@stanford.eduStanford University
surag@stanford.eduStanford University
meghaj@stanford.edu
Abstract
Game playing is a popular area within the field of
artificial intelligence. Most agents in literature have
hand-crafted features and are often trained on datasets
obtained from expert human play. We implement a self-
play based algorithm using neural networks for policy
estimation and Monte Carlo Tree Search for policy im-
provement, with no input human knowledge that learns
to play Othello. We evaluate our learning algorithm for
6x6 and 8x8 versions of the game of Othello. Our work
is compared with random and greedy baselines, as well
as a minimax agent that uses a hand-crafted scoring
function, and achieves impressive results. Further, our
agent for the 6x6 version of Othello easily outperforms
humans when tested against it.
1
Introduction
Game playing is a popular area within the field of artifi-
cial intelligence. One of the earliest works in this field
was a checkers engine developed in (Samuel 2000), that
learned through self-play and machine learning, and
not through rule-based methods. An early triumph was
Deep Blue (Campbell, Hoane, and hsiung Hsu 2002), a
computer program capable of superhuman performance
on Chess respectively, beating the top human players.
These are relatively simple games, where the branching
factor for each state is small, and it is easy to evaluate
how good a non-terminal position is. It was estimated
that games like Go, which have a large branching factor,
and where it is very difficult to determine the likely
winner from a non-terminal board position, would not
be solved for several decades. However, AlphaGo (Silver
et al. 2016), which uses recent deep reinforcement learn-
ing and Monte Carlo Tree Search methods, managed to
defeat the top human player, through extensive use of
domain knowledge and training on the games played by
top human players.
Many of the existing approaches for designing sys-
tems to play games relied on the availability of expert
domain knowledge to train the model on and evaluate
non-terminal states. Recently, however, AlphaGo Zero
(Silver et al. 2017b) described an approach that used
absolutely no expert knowledge and was trained entirely
Stanford University CS238 Final Project Report
through self-play. This new system, AlphaGo Zero, even
outperforms the earlier AlphaGo model. This represents
a very exciting result, that computers may be capable of
superhuman performances entirely through self-learning,
and without any guidance from humans.
In our work, we extract ideas from the AlphaGo Zero
paper and apply them to the game of Othello. We use
board sizes of 6x6 and 8x8, for which learning through
self-play is more tractable on the computing resources
available to us. For evaluation, we compare our trained
agents to random and greedy baselines, as well as a
minimax agent with hand-crafted features. We also
compared against humans, and found that our 6x6 ver-
sion achieves superhuman performance very quickly.
2
Related Work
Self-play for learning optimal playing strategies in games
has been a widely studied area. For example, 9x9 Go
has been studied in (Gelly and Silver 2008). Chess,
though widely played using alpha-beta search strategies,
has also seen some work through self-play methods in
(Heinz 2001). (Wiering 2010) study the problem of
learning to play Backgammon through a combination
of self-play and expert knowledge methods.
In particular, (Van Der Ree and Wiering 2013) learn
to play Othello through self-play methods, and (Nijssen
2007) apply Monte Carlo methods to Othello. For the
6x6 version, a perfect strategy for player 2 is known to
exist 1 .
(Silver et al. 2016) and (Silver et al. 2017b) have
trained a novel neural network agent to achieve state of
the art results in the game of Go. Very recently (just 4
days before submission of this report!), this approach has
also been extended to a general game-playing strategy
in (Silver et al. 2017a), achieving state of the art in the
games of Chess and Shogi.
3
Methods
We provide a high-level overview of the algorithm we
employ, which is based on the AlphaGo Zero (Silver
et al. 2017b) paper. The algorithm is based on pure
self-play and does not use any human knowledge except
1
Solved by Joel F Feinsteinthe rules of the game. At the core, we use a neural
network that evaluates the value of a given board state
and estimates the optimal policy. The self-play is guided
by a Monte-Carlo Tree Search (MCTS) that acts as a
policy improvement operator. The outcomes of each
game of self-play are then used as rewards, which are
used to train the neural network along with the improved
policy. Hence, the training is performed in an iterative
fashion- the current neural network is used to execute
self-play games, the outcomes of which are then used
to retrain the neural network. The following sections
describe the different components of our system in more
detail.
P (s, ·) = p~θ (s), which is the prior probability of taking
a particular action from state s according to the policy
returned by our neural network. From these, we calcu-
late U (s, a), which is an upper confidence bound on the
Q value of our edge. These values are calculated as
pP
b N (s, b)
U (s, a) = Q(s, a) + cpuct P (s, a)
1 + N (s, a)
We use a neural network that takes the raw board
state as the input. This is followed by 4 convolutional
networks and 2 fully connected feedforward networks.
This is followed by 2 connected layers- one that outputs
vθ and another that outputs the vector p~θ . Training is
performed using the Adam (Kingma and Ba 2014) opti-
mizer with a batch size of 64, with a dropout (Srivastava
et al. 2014) of 0.3, and batch normalisation (Ioffe and
Szegedy 2015). The code is implemented in PyTorch2 .Here, cpuct is a hyperparameter controlling the degree
of exploration (set as 1.0 in our experiments).
When using MCTS to find a policy from a given state
s, we start creating the MCTS tree with s as the root.
At each step of our iteration, we calculate the action
to take as the a which maximizes the upper confidence
bound U (s, a). If our next state already exists in our
MCTS tree, we continue our simulation. If it does not
exist, we create a new node in our tree and initialize its
P (s, ·) = p~θ (s) and the expected reward v = vθ (s) from
our neural network, and initialize Q(s, a) and N (s, a)
to 0 for all a. We then propagate the reward v back
up the MCTS tree, updating all the Q(s, a) values seen
during the simulation, and start again from the root.
On the other hand, if we encounter a terminal state, we
propagate the actual reward found from the board and
restart our MCTS.
Now, after a few simulations of the MCTS, our N (s, a)
values provide a good approximation for the optimal
stochastic process from each state. Hence, the action we
take is randomly sampled from a distribution πs , with
1
probability proportional to N (s, a) τ , where τ is a tem-
perature parameter. Setting τ to a high value gives us
almost uniform distribution, while setting it to 0 makes
us always select the best action. τ is hence another
hyperparameter controlling the degree of exploration
during our learning. Hence, the training example gen-
erated from the MCTS starting at s is (s, πs , r), where
r ∈ {+1, −1} which is determined at the end of the
game by considering whether the current player won or
lost. Pseudocode of the MCTS search is provided in
Algorithm 1.
3.23.3
3.1
Neural Policy and Value Network
We use a neural network fθ parametrised by θ that takes
as input the board state s and outputs the continuous
value of the board state vθ ∈ [−1, 1] from the perspective
of the current player, and a probability vector p~ over all
possible actions. p~θ represents a stochastic policy that
is used to guide the self-play.
The neural network is initialized randomly. At the
end of each iteration of self-play, the neural network is
provided training examples of the form (st , ~πt , zt ). ~πt
gives an improved estimate of the policy after performing
MCTS starting from st (described in Section 3.2), and
zt ∈ {−1, 1} is the final outcome of the game from the
perspective of the current player. The neural network
is then trained to minimize the following loss function:
X
l=
(vθ (st ) − zt )2 + ~πt log(~
pθ (st ))
t
Monte Carlo Tree Search for Policy
Improvement
We use a Monte Carlo Tree Search (Browne et al. 2012)
to improve upon the policy learned by the neural net-
work. MCTS is a policy search algorithm that balances
exploration with exploitation to output an improved pol-
icy after a number of simulations of the game. MCTS
explores the tree where nodes represent different board
configurations and a directed edge exists between two
nodes (i → j) if a valid action can cause state to transi-
tion from state i to state j. For each edge, we maintain
a Q value denoted by Q(s, a) which is the expected
reward for taking that action and N (s, a) which repre-
sents the number of times we took action a from state
s across different simulations. We also keep track of
2
www.pytorch.org
Policy iteration through Self-play
We now describe the complete training algorithm. We
initialize our neural network with random weights, thus
starting with a random policy. In each iteration of
our algorithm, we play a number of episodes (100 in
our experiments) of self-play using MCTS. This results
in a set of training examples of the form (st , ~πt , zt ).
We exploit the symmetry of the state space to further
augment our dataset. In our experiments, since Othello
is invariant to rotations and flips of the board, we thus
obtain 7 extra training examples per examples in our
dataset.
Then, we update our neural network using our new
training examples, to get a new neural network. We then
play our old and new networks against each other for a
number of games (40 in our experiments). If the new
network wins more than a set threshold number of timesAlgorithm 1 Monte Carlo Tree Search
1: procedure MCTS(s, θ)
2:
if s is terminal then
3:
return game_result
4:
if s ∈
/ Tree then
5:
Tree ← Tree ∪ s
6:
Q(s, ·) ← 0
7:
N (s, ·) ← 0
8:
P (s, ·) ← p~θ (s)
9:
return vθ (s)
10:
else
11:
a ← argmaxa0 ∈A U (s, a0 )
12:
s0 ←getNextState(s, a)
13:
v ←MCTS(s0 )
14:
Q(s, a) ← N (s,a)∗Q(s,a)+v
N (s,a)+1
15:
N (s, a) ← N (s, a) + 1
16:
return v
(60% in our experiments), we update the network and
continue with the next iteration, resetting the MCTS
tree. Else, we continue with the old network and the old
MCTS tree, and conduct another iteration to augment
our training examples further. Experimentally, we find
that when the new network was not better than the
old network, the new network obtained after a further
iteration of training was far better. Hence, in one or
two iterations we almost always improve our network.
In our experiments, the temperature parameter τ is set
to 1 for the first 25 turns in an episode, to encourage
early exploration, and then set to 0. It is always set to
0 during evaluation. Pseudocode of the policy iteration
algorithm is provided in Algorithms 2 and 3.
4
Experiments
The above sections describe a general approach to game-
playing. In our experiments, we specifically tackled
the problem of learning to play the game of Othello.
Othello is traditionally played on an 8x8 sized board.
The size of the state space is exponential in the size of
the board. Experimentally, we found that converging
to an optimal policy on the 8x8 board with limited
computing resources would take a very long time. In
order to show the effectiveness of our approach, we also
ran experiments on a 6x6 version of Othello3 . The 8x8
version was trained with 50 simulations of the MCTS
per step, while the 6x6 version was trained with 25.
Both were trained on training examples of 100 episodes
per training iteration. The 6x6 version completed 78
iterations of training, while the 8x8 version completed
30 iterations of training. Both were trained for over
72 hours on a Google Compute Engine instance with a
GPU.
3
Environment adapted
JaimieMurdock/othello
from
Algorithm 2 Policy Iteration through Self-Play
1: procedure PolicyIterationSP
2:
θ ←initNN()
3:
trainExamples ← []
4:
for i in [1, . . . , numIters] do
5:
for e in [1, . . . , numEpisodes] do
6:
ex ← executeEpisode(nn)
7:
trainExamples.append(ex)
θnew ← trainNN(trainExamples)
8:
if θnew beats θ ≥ thresh then
9:
θ ← θnew
return θ
Algorithm 3 Execute Episode
1: procedure ExecuteEpisode(θ)
2:
examples ← []
3:
s ← gameStartState()
4:
while True do
5:
for i in [1, . . . , numSims] do
6:
MCTS(s, θ)
7:
examples.add((s, πs , _))
8:
a∗ ∼ πs
9:
s ← gameNextState(s, a∗ )
10:
if gameEnded(s) then
11:
//fill _ in examples with reward
12:
examples ←assignRewards(examples)
13:
return examples
4.1
Baselines
We implemented two baselines for comparison with our
trained AI player. The first is a greedy player that always
chooses a move that causes the maximum number of
flips in the next step of the game. The second is a
random player baseline. A random player chooses from
one of the valid moves randomly at each step in the
game.
We also used a minimax agent4 as a third baseline
which tries to maximize the worst-case gain assuming
that the opponent plays perfectly at each move by ex-
ploring the game tree up to a certain depth. The results
of the different baselines are listed in Table 1.
4.2
Human Evaluation
We also implemented an interface where a human player
can play against any of our baselines or our learned
strategies. For the 6x6 version, we evaluated our bot
against a local player who has been playing Othello from
childhood. These results are also available in Table 1.
Since the 8x8 version took a lot more time to train, we
did not get a chance to evaluate against humans.
4.3
Analysis of Experiments
We analyze our performance as a function of training
time. In Figure 1 and Figure 2, we plot our performance
against the greedy and random baselines against the
https://github.com/
4
From https://github.com/Zolomon/reversi-aiFigure 1: Performance Against Random and Greedy
baselines over 30 iterations (6x6)
number of iterations trained. As we see, these simple
baselines are quickly beaten by the 6x6 version in a few
iterations. However, learning a good agent for the 8x8
bot is much more difficult. If performance against a
more sophisticated baseline is observed, it would help
decide when our model has converged and we can stop
training.
Aside from the comparisons against baselines, we
follow the (Silver et al. 2016) approach of analyzing the
games played by our agent, to try and understand its
strategies. In Figure 3 we examine our agent’s early
game strategies against the minimax bot. Our agent is
black, while the opponent is white. Boards are shown
on each turn after our agent has made a move. We see
that the strategy adopted is to quickly grow towards the
walls and corners, and capture the pieces there. This is
indeed a strong high-level strategy that human players
use, since pieces at corners and walls are very difficult
for the opponent to flip. It is quite remarkable that our
agent is able to display such subtle strategies through
self-play, even against a strong minimax opponent.
In Figure 4, we examine some late game moves of our
agent against the minimax strategy. We observe that 4
moves before the end, in terms of number of pieces we do
not appear to be performing significantly different from
our opponent. However, by the endgame our agent has
learned to position its pieces very strategically. Instead
of placing a position in a place which would maximize the
number of flips in one move (as the greedy baseline would
do), it places them in such a way that the opponent has
no moves left and is forced to pass. Hence, it can quickly
cover a larger portion of the board without the opponent
moving and thus completely dominate the board at the
end of the game.
5
Conclusions
We implement an agent that learns to play Othello
through pure self-play, without using any human knowl-
Figure 2: Performance Against Random and Greedy
baselines over 30 iterations (8x8)
Baseline
Greedy
Random
Minimax
Human
6x6 board
20/20
20/20
30/30
6/6
8x8 board
20/20
18/20
29/30
-
Table 1: Number of games won against various baselines
by our final models
edge. Our agent convincingly beats all baselines in-
cluding greedy, random and the standard alpha-beta
minimax AI baseline. Further, the time taken to make
a move is much less for our agent, since it is just a feed
forward operation in a neural network, compared to the
minimax algorithm, which involves exploring an expo-
nential state space to a large depth to get good results.
As seen in Section 3, our framework is very generic in
its implementation, and can be easily extended to many
other games such as Chess or Go.
The original implementation by DeepMind (Silver et
al. 2017b) uses orders of magnitude more raw compu-
tational power on industry hardware (4TPUs, 64GPUs,
and 19CPUs, for several days). In our work, we show
that it is possible to train similar networks on commod-
ity hardware for smaller problems. We plan to release
our implementation for the open source community.
References
[Browne et al. 2012] Browne, C. B.; Powley, E.; Whitehouse,
D.; Lucas, S. M.; Cowling, P. I.; Rohlfshagen, P.; Tavener, S.;
Perez, D.; Samothrakis, S.; and Colton, S. 2012. A survey
of monte carlo tree search methods. IEEE Transactions on
Computational Intelligence and AI in games 4(1):1–43.
[Campbell, Hoane, and hsiung Hsu 2002] Campbell,
M.;
Hoane, A.; and hsiung Hsu, F. 2002. Deep blue. Artificial
Intelligence 134(1):57 – 83.
[Gelly and Silver 2008] Gelly, S., and Silver, D. 2008. Achiev-
ing master level play in 9 x 9 computer go. In AAAI, volume 8,
1537–1540.a
b
c
d
e
f
a
b
c
d
e
f
a
b
c
d
e
f
a
1111
2222
3333
4444
5555
6666
b
c
def
def
Figure 3: Early game play of our agent(B) vs minimax(W), capturing walls and corners
a
b
c
d
e
f
a
b
c
d
e
f
a
b
c
d
e
f
a
1111
2222
3333
4444
5555
6666
b
c
Figure 4: Late game play of our agent(B) vs minimax (W), forcing passes
[Heinz 2001] Heinz, E. A. 2001. New Self-Play Results in
Computer Chess. Berlin, Heidelberg: Springer Berlin Heidel-
berg. 262–276.
[Ioffe and Szegedy 2015] Ioffe, S., and Szegedy, C. 2015.
Batch normalization: Accelerating deep network training by
reducing internal covariate shift. In International Conference
on Machine Learning, 448–456.
[Kingma and Ba 2014] Kingma, D., and Ba, J. 2014. Adam:
A method for stochastic optimization. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1412.6980.
[Nijssen 2007] Nijssen, J. 2007. Playing othello using monte
carlo. Strategies 1–9.
[Samuel 2000] Samuel, A. L. 2000. Some studies in machine
learning using the game of checkers. IBM Journal of Research
and Development 44(1.2):206–226.
[Silver et al. 2016] Silver, D.; Huang, A.; Maddison, C. J.;
Guez, A.; Sifre, L.; van den Driessche, G.; Schrittwieser, J.;
Antonoglou, I.; Panneershelvam, V.; Lanctot, M.; Dieleman,
S.; Grewe, D.; Nham, J.; Kalchbrenner, N.; Sutskever, I.;
Lillicrap, T.; Leach, M.; Kavukcuoglu, K.; Graepel, T.; and
Hassabis, D. 2016. Mastering the game of go with deep
neural networks and tree search. Nature 529(7587):484–489.
Article.
[Silver et al. 2017a] Silver, D.; Hubert, T.; Schrittwieser, J.;
Antonoglou, I.; Lai, M.; Guez, A.; Lanctot, M.; Sifre, L.;
Kumaran, D.; Graepel, T.; Lillicrap, T.; Simonyan, K.; and
Hassabis, D. 2017a. Mastering Chess and Shogi by Self-Play
with a General Reinforcement Learning Algorithm. ArXiv
e-prints.
[Silver et al. 2017b] Silver, D.; Schrittwieser, J.; Simonyan,
K.; Antonoglou, I.; Huang, A.; Guez, A.; Hubert, T.; Baker,
L.; Lai, M.; Bolton, A.; et al. 2017b. Mastering the game of
go without human knowledge. Nature 550(7676):354–359.
[Srivastava et al. 2014] Srivastava, N.; Hinton, G. E.;
Krizhevsky, A.; Sutskever, I.; and Salakhutdinov, R. 2014.
Dropout: a simple way to prevent neural networks from
overfitting. Journal of machine learning research 15(1):1929–
1958.
[Van Der Ree and Wiering 2013] Van Der Ree, M., and Wier-
ing, M. 2013. Reinforcement learning in the game of othello:
learning against a fixed opponent and learning from self-
play. In Adaptive Dynamic Programming And Reinforcement
Learning (ADPRL), 2013 IEEE Symposium on, 108–115.
IEEE.
[Wiering 2010] Wiering, M. A. 2010. Self-play and using an
expert to learn to play backgammon with temporal differ-
ence learning. Journal of Intelligent Learning Systems and
Applications 2(02):57.
